even though the colony is now six years
old the nest entrance is still an
unassuming hole in the ground but this
is now a portal into a magical
subterranean world a honey ant a super
colony home to several thousand workers
and hundreds of honey filled repeats
[Music]
[Applause]
the Queen now reigns over a formidable
force that dominates this part of
Horseshoe Canyon together they have
built a complex underground city
just beneath the surface is a network of
chambers and linking tunnels from these
a single vertical chimney extends 2
meters down into the concrete hard earth
to reach the colonies nerve center this
deep the soil is still moist the air
cooled despite the soaring surface
temperatures
this is the very heart of the Queen's
Empire
others too have been drawn to this
underground oasis
this beetle has made its way down into
the deeper recesses of the labyrinth
as it pushes on into the Royal chambers
the Imperial Guard immediately attack
but their jaws and acid sprays make
little impact on it's heavy armor after
a while they start to ignore the
intruder
perhaps the beetle begins to take on the
colony smell and no longer arouses the
guard suspicions but the ants leave it
alone that their peril
now passing itself off as a colony
member it's true intentions become clear
the beetle this big needs lots of food
and this nursery chamber is proving to
be a rich hunting ground
this year the colony has reached a
tipping point for the first time in its
six-year history there are male as well
as female ants in the nest the corral
Queen has finally succeeded in producing
her first generation of winged princes
and princesses soon these winged Royals
will fan out across the desert to
establish new colonies
all they need now is a trigger to send
them on their way
and that trigger is brewing high in the
desert sky
the summer rains finally arrived around
here it's called the monsoon season
these torrential downpours can dump
several centimeters of rain in just a
few hours the normally hard ground is
softened by the deluge
[Music]
as the day begins to cool the time has
finally come for the corral honey ants
to put in an appearance workers pour out
to secure the perimeter of the nest hole
creating a protected launch pad
the Queens and much smaller males move
up through the tunnels towards the
surface and out into the light
[Music]
still deep underground the Queen won't
witness these momentous events but our
winged sons and daughters are about to
spread the royal line far across the
desert
[Music]